Hi and welcome to this video on variable equality so variable equality we can think of how to compare
two variables in two very fundamentally different ways.
The first one is by comparing the memory address right as we know variables are simply pointers to objects
and memory.
And so we may want to find out are these two variables pointing to the same object that's comparing
the memory address.
We may also want to just compare the internal state of the objects the data.
For example the contents of two lists that may not reside at the same memory address but they may have
the same content and the same thing with strings and number values and all all the different objects
and data types that we can have in Python.
So to compare memory addresses we use a special operator called is which is called the identity operator.
So to compare two variables you might say.
One is that two that will return a boolean true or false telling you whether they have the same memory
address or not.
So remember how we were checking before the memory address.
Right.
By doing id of a an idea of B and comparing the two and seeing if they were equal.
Well you can do the same thing in code using the is operator the identity operator which compares memory
addresses on the other hand.
If we want to compare the internal state of the objects we use the equality operator which has this
double equal sign.
Now be careful.
It is not a single equal sign a single equal sign is that an assignment operator.
The double equal sign is the equality operator which will compare the internal state the data of the
two variables.
So you would say that one equals equals volume two that will tell you whether the contents of one involve
two are equal.
Now if you want to test the opposite if you want to test that the memory address of one variable isn't
the same as the memory address of the other variable.
Then you can use the special operator is not.
And that will you know you can use it this way if one is not volved to and it will tell you that it
will again return a boolean true or false.
They will tell you whether those two things are equal or not.
Now you don't have to use is not if you want you can just say not Val one is vult to.
That's one alternative way of checking.
But preferably use is not for the object state.
We also have the negation of the equality operator which is the exclamation point equals so not equals.
Remember that this exclamation point in a lot of different languages also means a boolean not well.
Here we have not equals written this way even though in Python the NOT operator is actually spelt out.
Not like we have here.
And so you would say Val one equals vowed to.
Now again there's different ways that you can write this.
You could say not valid one equals equals vowed to.
OK so let's look at some examples.
So let's say we have April 10 and B.
A.
So we've created a shared reference here.
So let's look at how each of these will evaluate A is B.
Well that's going to return true.
It's a shared reference it's got the same memory address but a equals equals B will also return true
because while both a and b are integers that contain the value 10.
So in terms of values they're equal let's say we look at two strings.
Now this is kind of a special case we'll look at the A's beam if you remember the previous video we
mentioned that the Python memory manager is actually going to create a shared reference with the string.
So a is b is actually going to return true.
In this case but as we'll see later do not count on it.
So this is why I'm saying in general when you want to compare the whole the values of two variables
you're generally going to always be using equals equals.
It is rare that you're going to use is because is comparing memory addresses so equals B will return
true.
And in this case and this case only a is b will also return true.
But if you know this was a different string is B might not return true.
So don't count on it.
Now let's take a look at two mutable objects.
We know that these will definitely be different memory addresses.
Right.
These are mutable objects.
So even though we've created them with the same values.
Python isn't going to use a shared reference here.
And so as B will return false.
However the two lists are actually equal in terms of values and so that will return true and we'll look
at equality of lists later because it can actually nest deeper.
You can have lists within lists of dictionaries within lists within dictionaries.
And that equals equals will actually dig down into all those nested data types.
So now let's look at this last one which is a little bit different because equals 10 and B equals 10.00.
So the first one is an integer but B is a float.
So in this case Python is not going to create a shared reference like we would have equals 10 and Beagle's
10.
So a is b is going to be definitely false and a equals equals B even though it's not the same data type.
Right.
Is of type integer.
And B is of type float the two values astore actually equal parts and figures that out it's a numbers
right and numbers contain integers and floats and decimals booleans complex numbers and so on and so
we'll get the same value.
So in terms of value they're the same right 10 and 10 Pono are actually the same.
We'll revisit floats later.
Because we're going to be a little careful with floats.
We don't have exact representations of floats in memory.
So in this case we did.
And therefore the two values were the same.
Lastly I want to talk very quickly about the none objects now the none object can be assigned to variables
to indicate that they are not set right in the way that we would expect them to be.
For example let's say that we have a variable that's supposed to be a string but we don't have a value
for it yet.
So we may set it equal to none.
Right.
In other languages like C You may think of that as a null pointer.
You can think of it as an empty value but nonetheless this non object is a real object that is managed
by the python memory manager.
So the memory manager will always create a shared reference to none.
So whenever you assign a variable to none.
You know if you have any number of variables assigned to none.
They will all have the same memory address again that's just the python manager doing that for us.
Right.
It's not creating a new instance of none.
Every time it's just pointing to the same one all the time.
So this means that if we set let's say a b and c to none right then a b and c are all pointing to the
same object in memory and throughout the lifetime of your application it will always point to the same
object to the same memory address.
Now from you know as you run your program from one time to another that memory address may change but
throughout the lifetime of your application it will be the same so we can test of a variable is not
set to empty by comparing its memory address to the memory address of none.
Using the is operator.
So we can test a is none right.
And so this is just something I wanted to point out.
Now since we talk about the identity operator is it so that will evaluate to true.
Now just keep in mind none is not nothing.
It's not you know it's not nothing.
It is an actual object but it is quite useful in terms of being able to set variables to none to indicate
pay they don't have a value.
Right.
They do they have value just happens to be none.
But that's quite useful and we'll see that throughout the schools where we can use that to our good
effect.
So if we have let's say X equals 10 we say x is none.
That's going to return false.
Right.
Because X is not none X is that an actual value or an actual object.
And if we test X is not None.
That will however return true.
Right that's the negation of the identity operator.
Let's start by looking at two variables that are going to have a shared reference so we can say eight
equals 10 and B equals 10.
Now we know that the Python memory manager is creating a shared reference automatically for us.
We can check that by looking at id of a and the ID of B.
OK which happens to have the same ID.
So a shared reference same memory address and therefore same internal content same value.
So we can print.
Let's say a is b and will print out the result of a is b.
While in this case it's true because they're pointing to the same memory address.
And of course in terms of a value we look at equals B will print out the result of a B.
What we get.
True as well which makes sense to both.
10.
OK.
Now let's do something that's not a shared reference.
We've seen that in the past as well we can create two variables.
Let's say a and b both 500.
Now the idea of a is that.
And the idea of B is something else right.
So now if we want to print and I'm just going to copy paste so we'll print is B and we get false because
well they're not the same memory address.
However the values are still the same.
Right.
So a class B will be true.
OK.
Now same thing we have a list let's say equals 1 2 3 and B equals 1 to 3.
Well we know that the idea of a and the ID of B are going to be different.
Right.
As you can see 1 6 8 4 1 6 2 different memory addresses here.
And so the same is going to happen where a is b is going to be false but a equals equals B is going
to be true.
Right because the contents of the two lists are the same.
They're equal
so the same thing also happens when you're looking at numbers.
You can say that say equals 10 and B equals ten point.
All right.
So again let's print out this.
Then we'll find that a is b is false.
Yes absolutely because we know that this is an integer.
This is a float can't be the same object.
So they have to have a different memory address.
But in terms of values Well they are equal 10 and 10.0 are the same number.
When we think of it logically right we can also look at.
Let's say we have a equals 10 Beagle's 10.
We can even make a equal to 10 plus zero G.
Now that's a complex number.
Look at the type of a.
That is a complex number.
Right.
And the type of B is a float.
So again here's the results of using memory address comparison the equality operator and the identity
operator.
Right is an equals equals but we can see that in terms of identity is not B which is true.
Right because A's complex is a float.
But in terms of value 10 and the complex number 10 plus 0 0 0 I if you lose the notation for complex
numbers are obviously the same value.
All right.
So next let's look at the none object.
I just want to talk about that.
So let's first of all look at the non-object right.
It has a memory address right.
Here's the idea of none.
It has a type.
Right.
It is an object that has the type none type K.
So it's a real object in memory.
The only thing is that if we have a equals none B equals none.
C equals none.
Then the ID of a.
And instead of me printing out the ID and checking if it's equal to the idea of B.
How about I just do a is b.
Right.
That is what we use to check memory addresses.
So A's B is true and a is C.
Well that's true as well and in fact a is none is also true and B is none and C is none K.
All these are true.
So it is helpful to use the non operator to just be able to create a variable with not assign a value
to it yet or maybe at some point in time to remove the value that a variable has.
Say that hey it doesn't have anything in it right now.
I still want to keep the variable name around for some reason.
I'm going to put something in it later but for now I'm going to point to this none object and then we
can test in our code to see if a variable is set to none.
And then we can maybe have an if statement that says OK if it's Nandu.
Otherwise do that right.
So it might be something like trying to read a file you know.
If the file contents exist that the file exists and the contents are there set you know equal to the
contents of the file.
If the file doesn't exist set a will to none right and then later on you can check to say well if he
has none which means hey the file wasn't there.
Do something otherwise do something else.
So none is used for scenarios like that but none is an object.
But it just happens to be really useful because Python's memory manager will create shared references
to that none object.
All right thanks for watching and I'll see you in the next video.